>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY JUNE 28... THE GREEK
GOVERNMENT IMPOSES RESTRICTIONS
TO PREVENT MASSIVE WITHDRAWALS
OF MONEY.
ALSO, CALIFORNIA POISED TO
LIMIT THE REASONS PARENTS CAN
REFUSE TO VACCINATE THEIR
CHILDREN.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE ORIGINS OF CONFLICT IN
KENYA'S WAR WITH AL SHABAAB.
>> Reporter: AL SHABAAB IS
EXTREMELY ACTIVE HERE AND IT IS
RECRUITING YOUNG KENYANS.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
WE BEGIN IN GREECE, WHERE WE SEE
THE STRONGEST SIGNS YET OF A
POSSIBLE ECONOMIC COLLAPSE.
BANKS AND THE STOCK MARKET WILL
BE CLOSED THERE TOMORROW.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS ALSO IMPOSED
CAPITAL CONTROLS, IN ORDER TO
LIMIT MASSIVE WITHDRAWALS OF
MONEY.
WORRIED CITIZENS HAVE BEEN
STANDING IN LONG LINES THIS
WEEKEND, EMPTYING OUT A.T.M.s.
TWO SENIOR BANK OFFICIALS SAY
500 OF THE COUNTRY'S MORE THAN
7,000 TELLER MACHINES RAN OUT OF
MONEY YESTERDAY.
EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANKERS SAID
THIS AFTERNOON, THEY WILL NO
LONGER KEEP EXTENDING EMERGENCY
BAILOUT FUNDS TO GREEK BANKS, AS
THE COUNTY IS SET TO DEFAULT ON
ITS FIRST 1.6 BILLION EURO LOAN
PAYMENT ON TUESDAY.
IT WAS PART OF THE TOPIC OF
CONVERSATION BETWEEN PRESIDENT
OBAMA AND GERMAN CHANCELLOR
ANGELA MERKEL THIS AFTERNOON.
ALL THIS COMES AFTER GREEK
LEADERS VOTED TO HAVE THE PEOPLE
DECIDE WHETHER OR NOT TO ACCEPT
THE CREDITOR'S TERMS IN A
POPULAR VOTE SCHEDULED FOR NEXT
SUNDAY.
WE'RE JOINED NOW BY ELENA
BECATOROS VIA SKYPE, SHE IS THE
BUREAU CHIEF FOR THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS IN ATHENS.
WHAT DOES THIS MEAN, THE STOCK
MARKET CLOSED TOMORROW?
>> Reporter: THE BANKS AND THE
STOCK MARKET WILL BE CLOSED
TOMORROW AND RESTRICTIONS WILL
BE PLACED ON HOW MUCH MONEY
GREEKS CAN WITHDRAW THEIR BANK
ACCOUNTS USING ATM MACHINES.
THE PRIME MINISTER ANNOUNCED IT
IN A TELEVISED ADDRESS.
HE SAID IT CAME AFTER A
RECOMMENDATION BY THE BANK OF
GREECE.
WHAT HE DIDN'T SAY IS EXACTLY
HOW LONG THE BANKS WILL REMAIN
CLOSED AND HOW MUCH THE BANKING
TRANSACTIONS WILL BE RESTRICTED.
A FEW BANKING SOURCES HAVE TOLD
US THAT THEY -- THE BANKS WILL
PROBABLY BE SHUT FOR SEVERAL
DAYS, PROBABLY THE ENTIRE WEEK.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IF ALL THESE
BANKS ARE SHUT, THAT MEANS
COMMERCE GRINDS TO A HALT.
HOW DO YOU PAY FOR YOUR
GROCERIES OR HOW DO THE
GROCERIES PAY THEIR SUPPLIERS?
>> Reporter: IT'S VERY UNCLEAR
AT THE MOMENT EXACTLY WHAT
CREDIT CAPITAL CONTROLS WILL BE
IN PLACE.
IT'S NOT CLEAR WHAT KIND OF
TRANSACTIONS WILL BE ALLOWED,
WHETHER ELECTRONIC BANK
TRANSFERS WILL BE ALLOWED.
WHETHER PEOPLE CAN PAY THEIR
BILLS OR NOT.
NOBODY ACTUALLY HAS BEEN TOLD
THIS AT THE MOMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE'S ALSO A
GAP HERE.
ON TUESDAY IS WHEN GREEK IS
ESSENTIALLY SET TO DEFAULT ON
ITS FIRST MASSIVE LOAN PAYMENT,
BUT THE GOVERNMENT OR THE
PARLIAMENT HAS APPROVED A
REFERENDUM THAT WON'T HAPPEN
TILL NEXT SUNDAY.
>> Reporter: YES, INDEED.
AND THE PRIME MINISTER SAID
TONIGHT THAT HE HAS RENEWED HIS
REQUESTS FOR THE BAILOUT TO BE
EXTENDED UNTIL THE REFERENDUM IS
HELD.
HE EVEN MADE THE SAME REQUEST
OVER THE WEEKEND EARLIER THIS
WEEKEND.
AND IT WAS REJECTED BY THE EURO
GROUP WHICH IS THE OTHER 18
FINANCE MINISTERS OF THE EURO
BANK.
SO SO FAR THAT HASN'T BEEN
ACCEPTED.
AND PRIME MINISTER ALEXIS SIP
RAS SAID TONIGHT HE HAS RENEWED
THAT COMPANY.
HE IT REMAINS TO BE SEEN WHETHER
THAT WILL BE APPROVED.
>> Sreenivasan: WE ALSO SEE THE
EUROPEAN COMMISSION, THE BANKERS
ACTUALLY PUBLICIZED THE DEAL
THAT'S ON THE TABLE KIND INFORM
AN EFFORT TO SHOW HOW FAR
THEY'VE COME TO MAKE GREEK
SOLVENT. >> Reporter: YES,
INDEED. THE REFERENDUM, THE WAY
THAT IT'S BEEN CALLED AT THE
MOMENT HAS BEEN THE GOVERNMENT
IS ADVOCATING A -- THEY'RE
SAYING IT IS ON THE CREDIT
SUISSE PROPOSAL.
PROBLEM IS SO FAR UNTIL THE
COMMISSION ACTUALLY PUBLICIZED
THIS DOCUMENT, THERE HADN'T BEEN
AN OFFICIALLY RELEASED DOCUMENT
OF WHAT EXACTLY THIS PROPOSAL
WAS.
IT WAS ALL IN THE FORM OF LEAKS
TO THE PRESS FROM BRUSSELS.
AND IT ALSO HASN'T BEEN
TRANSLATED IN GREEK.
SO THERE MIGHT BE AN ISSUE WITH
THAT WHEN GREECE HAS BEEN ASKED
TO VOTE ON A PROPOSAL THAT MANY
OF THEM, IF THEY DON'T SPEAK
ENGLISH, HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO
READ YET.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT DO YOU
SEE HAPPENING HERE IN THE NEXT
WEEK?
WE'VE BEEN TALKING ABOUT THIS
FOR FOUR YEARS, FIVE YEARS NOW.
>> Reporter: I HAVE TO BE
HONEST.
IT WAS VERY UNCLEAR.
I'M NOT SURE ANYBODY KNOWS
EXACTLY HOW THIS IS GOING TO
PLAY OUT.
THERE ARE SEVERAL SCENARIOS FROM
THE MORE REASONABLE TO THE MORE
OUTLANDISH BUT IF THERE'S ONE
THING THIS CRISIS HAS TAUGHT US
IS TO EXPECT THE UNEXPECTED.
IT REMAINS TO BE SEEN HOW THIS
WILL PLAY OUT.
THE CHANCELLORS OF GREECE ARE
PAYING -- THE DEBT ON TUESDAY
WHICH IS 1.6 BILLION EUROS IS AT
THIS STAGE PRETTY HIGH.
>> Sreenivasan: ELENA BECATOROS
JOINING US LIVE, THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS BUREAU CHIEF IN ATHENS.
THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: LARGE CROWDS
TURNED OUT FOR GAY PRIDE PARADES
AND FESTIVALS ACROSS THE COUNTRY
TODAY, BOLSTERED BY FRIDAY'S
SUPREME COURT DECISION
LEGALIZING SAME-SEX MARRIAGE IN
ALL 50 STATES.
HERE IN NEW YORK, ONLOOKERS
LINED THE STREETS, AS PARADE
FLOATS PASSED BY.
BUT AMID THE NATIONAL
CELEBRATION, A HANDFUL OF
POLITICIANS CONTINUED TO
CRITICIZE THE SUPREME COURT
DECISION.
LOUISIANA IS THE ONLY STATE
REFUSING TO ISSUE ANY MARRIAGE
LICENSES TO SAME SEX COUPLES.
THE STATE'S ATTORNEY GENERAL
SAYS HE WANTS TO WAIT FOR A
FINAL SUPREME COURT ORDER ON THE
ISSUE.
THIS MORNING ON NBC'S "MEET THE
PRESS," LOUISIANA GOVERNOR AND
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL-HOPEFUL
BOBBY JINDAL SAID HE STRONGLY
DISAGREES WITH THE RULING.
>> I THINK THE LEFT IS NOW GOING
TO GO AFTER OUR FIRST AMENDMENT
RIGHTS.
I THINK IT IS WRONG FOR THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO FORCE
CHRISTIAN INDIVIDUALS,
BUSINESSES, PASTORS, CHURCHES TO
PARTICIPATE IN WEDDING
CEREMONIES THAT VIOLATE OUR
SINCERELY HELD RELIGIOUS
BELIEFS, WE HAVE TO STAND UP AND
FIGHT FOR RELIGIOUS LIBERTY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN VIENNA,
NEGOTIATIONS OVER LIMITING
IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM MAY
EXTEND BEYOND TUESDAY'S
SCHEDULED DEADLINE.
IRAN'S FOREIGN MINISTER RETURNED
TO TEHRAN TODAY FOR FURTHER
INSTRUCTIONS.
A MAJOR STICKING POINT REMAINS
HOW MUCH ACCESS U.N. WEAPONS
INSPECTORS WOULD GET TO IRAN'S
MILITARY SITES.
THE TALKS AMONG IRAN AND THE
FIVE PERMANENT MEMBERS OF THE
U.N. SECURITY COUNCIL PLUS
GERMANY.
ARE AIMED AT CURTAILING IRAN'S
CAPACITY TO MAKE NUCLEAR WEAPONS
IN EXCHANGE FOR EASING OF
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS.
FRENCH POLICE ARE HOLDING A 35-
YEAR-OLD MUSLIM MAN FOR RAMMING
A TRUCK INTO AN AMERICAN-OWNED
CHEMICAL WAREHOUSE IN
SOUTHEASTERN FRANCE FRIDAY.
POLICE SAY THE MAN ALSO BEHEADED
HIS BOSS, AS ITN'S JONATHAN
RUGMAN REPORTS.
>> Reporter: YASSIN SALHI WAS
FORCED TO THE GROUND BY A
FIREFIGHTERS AND WHEN POLICE
REACHED THE GREED, THEY FOUND
THE SEVERED HEAD OF HIS BOSS
HANGING ON A FENCE NEARBY.
THE VICTIM OF THIS GROTESQUE
ATTACK WAS HERVE CORNORA, A
54-YEAR-OLD MARRIED FATHER OF
ONE.
IT'S BELIEVED HE WAS KILLED
BEFORE SALHI RAMMED HIS VAN INTO
THE PLANT IN AN ATTEMPT TO BLOW
IT UP.
THE VICTIM AND HIS ALLEGED
ATTACKER WORKED HERE AT THIS
TRANSPORT COMPANY, WHERE SALHI
BEGAN DRIVING VANS IN MARCH.
IT'S NOT KNOWN IF THESE GAS
CANISTERS WERE THE KIND SALHI
DELIVERED AND WERE SEEN
YESTERDAY TRYING TO OPEN AND SET
ALIGHT.
POLICE SOURCES SAY YASSIN SALHI
IS REFUSING TO TALK ABOUT THIS
ATTACK.
IT'S STILL NOT KNOWN IF HE WAS
ACTING ENTIRELY ON HIS OWN OR AS
PART OF A COORDINATED WAVE OF
TERRORIST VIOLENCE WHICH MAY NOT
BE OVER YET.
>> Sreenivasan: IN TAIWAN,
OFFICIALS ARE INVESTIGATING THE
CAUSE OF A MASSIVE FIRE DURING A
MUSIC PARTY AT A WATER PARK IN
TAIPEI LAST NIGHT.
A WARNING, THESE IMAGES ARE
GRAPHIC.
AMATEUR VIDEO SHOWS THE MOMENT
WHEN A FIREBALL IGNITED AFTER
SOMEONE SPRAYED COLORED POWDER
OVER THE CROWD OF AT LEAST A
THOUSAND PEOPLE.
NEARLY 500 PEOPLE WERE HURT OR
BURNED, AND TODAY 400 REMAINED
IN THE HOSPITAL.
NO ONE WAS KILLED, BUT EIGHT
PEOPLE WERE REPORTED TO BE IN
CRITICAL CONDITION.
IN THE SOUTH, FOUR PREDOMINANTLY
BLACK CHURCHES HAVE BURNED THIS
WEEK, INVESTIGATORS SUSPECT
THREE OF THEM WERE SET ON
PURPOSE.
FEDERAL AND STATE OFFICIALS ARE
INVESTIGATING A FIRE FRIDAY
NIGHT THAT DESTROYED THE GLOVER
GROVE MISSIONARY BAPTIST CHURCH
IN WARRENVILLE, SOUTH CAROLINA.
ON TUESDAY, A CHURCH IN GEORGIA
WAS BURNED, AND ON WEDNESDAY, A
NORTH CAROLINA CHURCH CAUGHT
FIRE.
THAT BLAZE REPORTEDLY CAUSED
250,000 IN DAMAGE.
A FLORIDA CHURCH CAUGHT FIRE
FRIDAY MORNING, BUT
INVESTIGATORS RULED IT
ACCIDENTAL.
IN FLORIDA, AN UNMANNED,
PRIVATELY FUNDED ROCKET EXPLODED
ABOUT TWO MINUTES AFTER LIFT-OFF
AT CAPE CANAVERAL THIS MORNING.
THE FALCON 9 "SPACE X" ROCKET
WAS MAKING A CARGO RUN TO THE
INTERNATIONAL SPACE STATION, BUT
THE BLAST DESTROYED THE SUPPLIES
ON BOARD.
THE TWO RUSSIAN COSMONAUTS AND
AN AMERICAN ASTRONAUT ON BOARD
THE SPACE STATION HAVE FOUR
MONTHS WORTH OF FOOD AND
SUPPLIES LEFT.
RUSSIA PLANS TO LAUNCH ITS OWN
SUPPLY ROCKET FRIDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IT'S PRIDE
WEEKEND IN NEW YORK CITY.
SEE SCENES FROM CELEBRATIONS
BEING HELD HERE AND AROUND THE
WORLD.
VISIT OUR WEBSITE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
ON FRIDAY, AL-SHABAAB MILITANTS
ATTACKED AN AFRICAN UNION
MILITARY BASE IN SOUTHERN
SOMALIA KILLING DOZENS OF
TROOPS.
IT'S THE LATEST IN A SERIES OF
ATTACKS THE MILITANT GROUP HAS
LAUNCHED WITHIN SOMALIA'S
BORDERS.
BUT OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS, AL-
SHABAAB HAS ALSO GONE AFTER
MALLS, SCHOOLS, AND RESTAURANTS
AS IT TRIES TO EXERT MORE
INFLUENCE IN THE REGION.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MARTIN
SEEMUNGAL EXPLAINS THE
COMPLICATED HISTORY OF AL
SHABAAB.
>> Reporter: IT HAS BEEN TWO
MONTHS SINCE AL-SHABAAB ISLAMIC
MILITANTS TARGETED THE
UNIVERSITY IN GARISSA, KENYA.
A NATION MADE UP OF MORE THAN
80% CHRISTIANS, IT WAS THE
CHRISTIANS THAT THE ISLAMIC
MILITANTS WERE AFTER, SPARING
THE LIVES OF STUDENTS THEY
BELIEVED TO BE MUSLIMS.
>> Reporter: CEDRIC BARNES IS
THE DIRECTOR OF THE
INTERNATIONAL CRISIS GROUP IN
NAIROBI AND AN EXPERT ON AL-
SHABAAB.
>> THEY KNEW THAT THE PEOPLE
THERE WOULD BE MOSTLY THE PEOPLE
THAT ARE A LONG WAY AWAY FROM
HOME AND PROBABLY, LARGELY,
PREDOMINANTLY CHRISTIAN.
SO IT WAS VERY DELIBERATE IT WAS
VERY CYNICAL .
>> Reporter: 147 STUDENTS WERE
KILLED, SHOT, OR HACKED TO
DEATH.
AMONG THE DEAD-19 YEAR OLD BILHA
GITAU.
THIS IS HER FAMILY'S HOME
OUTSIDE NAIROBI.
A SIMPLE BUILDING ON A SMALL
PLOT OF LAND.
THIS IS HER FATHER, GODFREY.
>> (translated): WHEN I HEARD
ABOUT THE ATTACK I WAS WORRIED,
HE SAYS.
I TRIED CALLING HER BUT THERE
WAS NO ANSWER.
>> Reporter: HE STILL STRUGGLES
TO UNDERSTAND, WHY?
>> THESE PEOPLE ARE NOT RIGHT HE
SAYS.
MY DAUGHTER WAS KILLED JUST
BECAUSE SHE WAS A CHRISTIAN.
I DON'T UNDERSTAND WHY THEY ARE
DOING THIS.
>> Reporter: AL-SHABAAB, "THE
YOUTH" IN ARABIC.
SOMALIA'S VERSION OF AL QAEDA,
A GROUP TO WHOM IT HAS PLEDGED
ALLEGIANCE.
THEY ARE A HARDLINE ISLAMIC
GROUP PREACHING EXTREMISM,
FIGHTING FOR POWER IN SOMALIA,
AT WAR WITH NEIGHBORING
COUNTRIES.
FUAD SHONGALE IS A KEY AL-
SHABAAB IDEOLOGUE ALLEGED TO BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR A SERIES OF
TERROR ATTACKS INSIDE SOMALIA.
>> ONLY WHEN WE FIGHT THE
UNBELIEVERS CAN WE BE HONORED,
HE SAYS.
IF WE DO NOT FIGHT THEM WE WILL
NOT BE HONORED.
>> Reporter: ANARCHY ERUPTED IN
SOMALIA AFTER THE FALL OF THE
GOVERNMENT IN 1991 AND THE
ISLAMIC COURT UNION, A GROUP OF
AUTONOMOUS COURTS FORMED ALONG
CLAN LINES, MANAGED TO RESTORE A
FRAGILE PEACE IN SOMALIA AFTER
YEARS OF INTER-CLAN FIGHTING.
BUT EVENTUALLY THAT FRAGILE
PEACE BROKE DOWN AND AL-SHABAAB
EMERGED.
MOST SOMALIS PRACTICE A MORE
MODERATE FORM OF ISLAM-SUFISM-
AND SUPPORTED AN INITIATIVE TO
FORM A TRANSITIONAL NATIONAL
GOVERNMENT, COMPLETELY CONTRARY
TO WHAT AL-SHABAAB WANTS, TO THE
WAY AL-SHABAAB THINKS.
>> SO THEY ALL BELIEVE THAT THEY
ARE PERFORMING THEIR ISLAMIC
DUTY BY FIGHTING AND THAT THEY
ARE GOING TO CREATE A BETTER
SOCIETY, AN ISLAMIC SOCIETY BY
UNDERTAKING ARMED JIHAD.
>> Reporter: IN 2006
PREDOMINATELY CHRISTIAN ETHIOPIA
SENT IN ITS SOLDIERS TO HELP THE
TRANSITIONAL GOVERNMENT, FORCING
AL-SHABAAB FROM THE CAPITAL
MOGADISHU TO ITS STRONGHOLDS IN
SOUTHERN SOMALIA.
BUT AL-SHABAAB USED THE FOREIGN
INTERVENTION AS A RALLYING POINT
TO ATTRACT SUPPORTERS.
IT IS FUNDED BY SOMALI
INDIVIDUALS IN THE DIASPORA,
OTHER TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS,
KIDNAPPING AND PIRACY.
AS AL-SHABAAB ATTACKS CONTINUED,
AFRICAN NATIONS INCLUDING KENYA
SENT IN TROOPS THAT PUSHED AL-
SHABAAB BACK TO THE COUNTRYSIDE.
THE GROUP RESPONDED BY MAKING
KENYA A TARGET.
EVEN TODAY, AL-SHABAAB CONTINUES
TO USE FOREIGN INTERVENTIONS TO
APPEAL TO SOMALIS AND
SPECIFICALLY TO MUSLIMS.
>> IT'S SAYING, WE ARE DEFENDING
YOU MUSLIMS.
YOU HAPPEN TO BE SOMALI, BUT WE
ARE DEFENDING YOU MUSLIMS FROM
THESE INTERVENTIONS THAT COME
FROM UNBELIEVERS.
>> Reporter: IN SOME AREAS UNDER
AL-SHABAAB'S CONTROL THE
LAWLESSNESS ENDED, ELECTRICITY
WAS RESTORED AND PUBLIC WORKS
PROJECTS WERE RESTARTED.
BUT THE STRICTEST FORM OF SHARIA
LAW WAS ALSO IMPOSED, AT ODDS
WITH THE WAY MOST SOMALIS
PRACTICE ISLAM.
EVEN THOUGH AL-SHABAAB CONTINUED
TO LOSE GROUND, THEY DID NOT
LOSE THE ABILITY TO LAUNCH
ATTACKS.
IT HAS ASSASSINATED TRANSITIONAL
GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS, BOMBED
GOVERNMENT MINISTRIES, CARRIED
OUT SUICIDE ATTACKS AGAINST
SOFT-TARGETS-- HOTELS IN
MOGADISHU.
AND THE ATTACKS HAVE ALSO GONE
BEYOND SOMALIA.
THE WESTGATE MALL ATTACK IN
NAIROBI, KENYA IN SEPTEMBER OF
2013 WAS CARRIED OUT WITH
MURDEROUS EFFICIENCY, THE AL-
SHABAAB GUNMAN STORMING THE MALL
KILLING 62 PEOPLE AND INJURING
127.
WITNESSES SAID MUSLIMS WERE
SPARED-- NON-MUSLIMS WERE
EXECUTED.
KENYA'S PRESIDENT, UHURU
KENYATTA TRIED TO CONSOLE A
STUNNED NATION.
KENYATTA'S OWN NEPHEW WAS KILLED
IN THE ATTACK.
>> TERRORISM IN AND OF ITSELF IS
THE PHILOSOPHY OF COWARDS.
>> Reporter: KENYA STRUCK BACK
SHELLING AL-SHABAAB TARGETS IN
SOMALIA.
INTERNALLY, KENYAN POLICE AND
SECURITY FORCES INTENSIFIED
OPERATIONS IN AREAS WHERE MANY
OF KENYA'S ETHNIC SOMALIS LIVE.
HOMES AND MOSQUES LINKED TO
SUSPECTED RADICALS WERE RAIDED.
CEDRIC BARNES SAYS IT WAS A VERY
FOCUSED, VERY INTENSE GOVERNMENT
CAMPAIGN AGAINST KENYA'S SOMALI
COMMUNITY.
>> SO YOU'VE HAD ASSASSINATIONS,
YOU'VE HAD ARRESTS, YOU'VE HAD
PEOPLE BEING DEPORTED AND YOU'VE
HAD GENERAL HARASSMENT.
>> Reporter: THE GOVERNMENT
DENIED EXTRA JUDICIAL
ASSASSINATIONS BUT THE OFFICIAL
LINE HAS BEEN CLEAR, THE
CRACKDOWN IS PART OF A
NECESSARY, PRE-EMPTIVE COUNTER-
TERRORISM EFFORT.
WHEN THE APRIL ATTACK IN GARISSA
CAME THE LOSS OF SO MANY
INNOCENTS TORE AT THE HEART OF
KENYA, AND GRIEF TURNED TO SHOCK
WHEN IT WAS REVEALED THAT THREE
OF THE FOUR ATTACKERS MIGHT HAVE
BEEN KENYANS, AND NOT ETHNIC
SOMALIS.
PRESIDENT KENYATTA APPEARING ON
TV AGAIN, THIS TIME TO DELIVER
THE SOBERING NEWS THAT THE
THREAT IS ALSO HOMEGROWN.
>> THE PLANNERS AND FINANCIERS
OF THIS BRUTALITY ARE DEEPLY
EMBEDDED IN OUR COMMUNITIES AND
WERE SEEN PREVIOUSLY AS ORDINARY
HARMLESS PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: KENYA SHARES A LONG
BORDER WITH SOMALIA THAT STARTS
INLAND, RUNS PAST GARISSA, RIGHT
DOWN TO THE INDIAN OCEAN.
MOMBASA IS ABOUT 250 MILES FROM
THE SOMALI BORDER.
IT IS THE MAJOR CITY ON THE
KENYAN COAST.
IT IS PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM.
AL-SHABAAB IS EXTREMELY ACTIVE
HERE AND IT IS RECRUITING YOUNG
KENYANS.
UNEMPLOYED, DISILLUSIONED, ANGRY
AT THE WAY THEY FEEL THE
GOVERNMENT SOMETIMES TREATS
MUSLIMS.
ABDUL, NOT HIS REAL NAME, IS ONE
OF THEM.
HE SAYS SOME OF HIS FRIENDS HAVE
JOINED AL-SHABAAB AND HE SAYS HE
MAY TOO.
>> HE SAYS WESTGATE AND GARISSA
WERE CARRIED OUT FOR REVENGE,
BECAUSE OF KENYA'S INVOLVEMENT
IN SOMALIA.
DO YOU BELIEVE IN IT OR ARE YOU
AGAINST THOSE ATTACKS?
>> Reporter: WE TRIED TO SPEAK
TO FAMILIES WHO BELIEVE THEIR
SONS HAVE GONE TO SOMALIA BUT IT
WAS DIFFICULT BECAUSE OF THE
LEVEL OF MISTRUST.
HUSSEIN KHALID IS EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR OF HAKI, A MUSLIM HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATION.
>> FAMILIES FEAR THAT IF THEY
SPEAK OUT MAYBE THEY WOULD BE
CONSIDERED AS TRAITORS BY YOU
KNOW AL-SHABAAB.
FAMILIES ALSO FEAR THAT IF THEY
SPEAK UP THEN PROBABLY THE
GOVERNMENT WILL COME FOR THEM IN
THE GUISE OF LOOKING FOR THEIR
RELATIVES.
>> Reporter: THIS WOMAN AGREED
TO AN INTERVIEW BUT DIDN'T WANT
TO REVEAL HER IDENTITY.
SHE SAYS HER SON JOINED AL-
SHABAAB IN SOMALIA IN 2012.
SHE SAYS HE WAS KILLED LAST
YEAR.
THE CIRCUMSTANCES AROUND HIS
DEATH ARE UNCLEAR.
>> (translated): IT IS
TERRIBLE.
AL-SHABAAB IS BRAINWASHING YOUNG
PEOPLE, NOT DOING A GOOD THING.
I LOST HOPE WHEN MY SON JOINED
THEM.
I KNEW IT WAS OVER FOR HIM.
>> Reporter: THE FATHER OF
BILHA, ONE OF THE 147 MURDERED
IN GARISSA, LIVES WITH HIS LOST
HOPE EVERYDAY.
HIS DAUGHTER'S GRAVE IS IN THE
NEARBY FIELD.
ONE SMALL MONUMENT TO A NATION'S
WAR WITH AL-SHABAAB.
>> Sreenivasan: CALIFORNIA IS ON
THE VERGE OF REQUIRING MORE
CHILDREN TO GET VACCINATIONS,
EVEN IF PARENTS DISAGREE.
THE STATE'S ASSEMBLY PASSED A
BILL THIS WEEK THAT ALLOWED
MEDICAL EXEMPTIONS BUT DID NOT
ALLOW FOR EXEMPTIONS BASED ON
PERSONAL BELIEFS."
WALL STREET JOURNAL" REPORTER
CAROLINE PORTER JOINS ME NOW
FROM LOS ANGELES WITH MORE ON
THIS DIVISIVE ISSUE.
PUT THE NUMBERS IN PERSPECTIVE.
HOW MANY KIDS IN THE CALIFORNIA
SCHOOL SYSTEM AREN'T VACCINATED?
>> Reporter: SO IT'S A SMALL
PERCENTAGE OF SCHOOL CHILDREN
WHO ARE NOT VACCINATED.
BUT THE CONCERN IS THAT IT COULD
BE RISING.
OVER THE PAST DECADE OR SO,
WE'VE SEEN AN INCREASE IN
PARENTS WHO ARE LOOKING AT WAYS
TO REDUCE OR POSSIBLY CHANGE THE
WAY IN WHICH CHILDREN RECEIVE
THEIR VACCINATIONS.
AND THE CONCERN IS THERE WOULD
BE CLUSTERS OF CHILDREN WHERE
THEY DON'T REACH WHAT'S CALLED
HERD IMMUNITY WHERE THERE AREN'T
95% OF THE POPULATION WITH THE
REQUIRED VACCINES WHICH WOULD
MAKE OUTBREAKS MORE LIKELY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHERE ARE
THESE CLUSTERS OR WHAT DO WE
KNOW ABOUT THEM?
>> SO THE CLUSTERS SEEM TO BE IN
PLACES WITH EITHER HIGH EDUCATED
POPULATION OR THOSE WITHOUT --
BELOW THE POVERTY LINE.
SO IT SEEMS TO GO EITHER -- IN A
SITUATION WHERE THERE AREN'T
ENOUGH RESOURCES OR WHERE THERE
ARE SUCH RESOURCES THAT PEOPLE
ARE TAKING THEIR OWN INITIATIVE
NOT TO VACCINATE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IF THIS LAW
GETS SIGNED BY GOVERNOR BROWN,
DOES THIS MEAN THAT IF YOU HAVE
A -- IF YOU WANT A PERSONAL
BELIEF EXEMPTION YOU'RE GOOD
NIGHT HAVE TO HOME-SCHOOL YOUR
CHILD?
>> WELL, THAT'S CORRECT.
BASICALLY THAT'S ONE OF THE MAIN
CONCERNS IS IT'S A
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO A FREE
PUBLIC EDUCATION IN CALIFORNIA.
SO IF I CHOOSE NOT TO VACCINATE
MY CHILDREN, DOES THAT MEAN I
HAVE TO HOME-SCHOOL?
AND THERE ARE A COUPLE OF
EXCEPTIONS TO THAT.
YOU CAN HOME-SCHOOL IN GROUPS,
SO FAMILIES CAN GET TOGETHER AND
SAY, YOU KNOW, WE'RE GOING TO
HOME-SCHOOL OUR CHILDREN
TOGETHER BECAUSE THEY ALL DO NOT
HAVE THE SAME REQUIREMENTS IN
TERMS OF VACCINES.
THE OTHER OPTION IS YOU CAN HAVE
WHAT'S CALLED AN INDEPENDENT
STUDY IN SCHOOLS.
WHAT THAT GENERALLY MEANS IS
THAT YOU WON'T BE IN A CLASSROOM
WITH OTHER STUDENTS BY AND
LARGE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IF THIS
BECOMES LAW, IS THE OPPOSITION
READY TO SUE TO TRY TO CHALLENGE
IT?
>> SO THE OPPOSITION HAS BEEN
LOUD.
I MEAN, IN TERMS OF TESTIMONY
AND HEARINGS AND PROTESTS AND
PETITIONS, FROM WHAT I HEAR,
IT'S BEEN ONE OF THE MOST
CONTROVERSIAL AND ACRIMONIOUS
DEBATES THAT WE'VE HAD HERE IN
CALIFORNIA THIS LEGISLATIVE
SESSION.
AND TALKING TO DIFFERENT
PROTESTERS OR ORGANIZERS, WHAT I
HEAR IS THAT THEY ARE
CONSIDERING LITIGATION.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHERE DO
DOCTORS COME DOWN ON THIS?
I KNOW SOME PEDIATRICIANS'
OFFICES WILL ACTUALLY REFUSE TO
SEE YOU IN THEIR CLINICS IF YOU
DON'T VACCINATE YOUR CHILD.
>> YOU KNOW, EVERY DOCTOR'S
GOING TO HAVE A DIFFERENT
OPINION.
BUT THE COSPONSOR OF THE BILL IS
A PEDIATRICIAN HIMSELF.
AND I THINK THAT'S ONE OF THE
MAIN THOUGHTS OF HIS IN WANTING
TO PUT THIS THROUGH IS CONCERNS
FOR THE POPULATION AT LARGE AND
THE MEDICAL COMMUNITY HAS HAD
CONCERNS.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
CAROLINE PORTER OF THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL" JOINING US FROM
LOS ANGELES.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: TUESDAY ON PBS,"
FRONTLINE" PREMIERES "GROWING
UP TRANS", A DOCUMENTARY THAT
EXPLORES THE STRUGGLES,
OPPORTUNITIES, AND CHOICES FACED
BY TRANSGENDER CHILDREN AND
THEIR FAMILIES.
THE PROGRAM TELLS THE STORY OF
EIGHT KIDS IN VARIOUS STAGES OF
TRANSITIONING, INCLUDING
NINE-YEAR-OLD LIA.
♪
>> I AM TRANSGENDER.
I WAS BORN MALE AND IDENTIFY AS
FEMALE.
BUT I LIKE TO SAY THAT I'M A
GIRL STUCK IN A BOY'S BODY.
I TRANSITIONED WHEN I WAS 6 OR 7
TO MORE OF A GIRL, AND NOW I'M
COMPLETE... WELL, ALMOST
COMPLETELY FEMALE.
>> IN THE SECOND GRADE I WAS
LIAM AND THIS YEAR I CHANGED MY
NAME OFFICIALLY.
SO I'VE CHANGED MY NAME, MY
CLOTHES, MY ROOM, AND MY
PRONOUNS.
AND THAT'S REALLY ALL YOU NEED
EXCEPT FOR THE FIFTH ONE THAT I
STILL NEED, SURGERY AND
MEDICINE.
TO HELP ME LOOK LIKE A GIRL.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT,
UPSTATE NEW YORK PRISON ESCAPEE
DAVID SWEAT HAS BEEN CAPTURED.
STATE TROOPERS SHOT SWEAT IN
THE SMALL TOWN OF CONSTABLE AND
TOOK HIM INTO CUSTODY.
SWEAT AND ANOTHER CONVICTED MAN
BROKE OUT OF PRISON THREE WEEKS
AGO.
POLICE KILLED MATT ON FRIDAY.
TOMORROW THE FINAL SESSION IN
THIS TERM FOR THE SUPREME COURT.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR THIS WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.